---
layout: post
title:  "Using (relatively) new web technology"
date:   2018-01-17 13:00:00 -0400
image:  assets/meps-logo.png
---

The world of web development is constantly changing. In an attempt to keep up,
I've been working on a project which uses (relatively) new technology like Redis,
React, Docker, GitLab CI, and other trendy stuff.

The project is called the MEPS metric, a self-help app that my father came up with.

> Long commutes can be the mother of invention.
> MEPS Metric came from reflecting on my day and challenging myself to improve my mood.
> \- Steve Chaffee

[https://meps-metric.com/](https://meps-metric.com/)

[https://gitlab.com/mac-chaffee/meps-metrics/tree/master](https://gitlab.com/mac-chaffee/meps-metrics/tree/master)

The idea is that you rate your mental, emotional, physical, and spiritual or social
health every day out of 10. You can also add comments and journal entries (WIP) about the day.
Then, you are presented with interactive graphs of your data and tips on improving your
MEPS metric.

## Infrastructure

{% include image.html name="meps-infrastructure.png"
  alt="The infrastructure of meps-metric.com"
  caption="The infrastructure of meps-metric.com" %}


Compared to some of my other projects, this one is pretty simple. The frontend
is React, so on every `componentDidMount()`, it makes `fetch()` calls to the
backend. The backend is written in Python using [Hug](https://github.com/timothycrosley/hug),
a library that does a lot of magic that makes writing APIs very succinct. The API
in turn sends queries to Redis for persistence. Yes, I'm [using Redis as my
primary data store](https://muut.com/blog/technology/redis-as-primary-datastore-wtf.html).

Everything is thrown into three docker containers (nginx, api, and redis) and
uploaded to the GitLab Container Registry I get for free with any GitLab repo.
Once the images are uploaded, it's a simple matter to kick off a GitLab CI job
to spin up the containers. That all happens in an EC2 instance using a
[gitlab shell runner](https://docs.gitlab.com/runner/executors/shell.html)

## Future Work

Future infrastructure work could include going serverless or keeping the server and using
Kubernetes for its hot-reloading feature. Kubernetes could also make it easier
to run multiple websites on the same server, which is starting to sound like a
good idea considering every new side project costs $4-5/month at minimum.

The daily journal feature is another future feature, but I first need to find a good way to
store those journal entries. When I store user data in Redis, it's just
a JSON string. So my plan is to encrypt that entire string, but I'm not sure what
to do with the keys to ensure I don't have access to them.

And of course, I need to flex my frontend muscles to implement these new mockups:

{% include image.html name="meps-mockup.png"
  alt="A mockup of the MEPS frontend" %}
